chore(blog): add Intent-driven Parser(s) API blog post (#241)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/intent-driven-api.md

The latter is, precisely, a problem for many developers. The feared 👻  **breaking changes** 👻.

- Disclaimer: this post provides examples from the point of view of a software library API maintainer. However, the same principles apply to any other API, such command-line tools, REST, Kernel modules, peripheral drivers, etc.

## What is a breaking change?

> A change in one part of a software system that potentially causes other components to fail; occurs most often in shared libraries of code used by multiple applications.

> Source: [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/breaking_change](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/breaking_change)

Breaking changes are non-backward compatible changes in the public interface of an application, either a library, an API service or even a command-line utility.

Users of such software are forced to alter their code if they want to use the latest version, otherwise their code will be unusable.

> I propose a metaphor to better understand what a **breaking change** is ****based on something that happened to me a few days ago: Imagine that your preferred supermarket, the one that you have been going to for several years, decides to completely restructure its interior. Where you could find the fruit, now you only find water and other drinks. At this point, I have three options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I propose a metaphor to better understand what a **breaking change** is based on something that happened to me a few days ago: Imagine that your preferred supermarket, the one that you have been going to for several years, decides to completely restructure its interior. Where you could find the fruit, now you only find water and other drinks. At this point, I have three options:
```

Therefore, the second option would be to look for another library or an API designed to avoid, as far as possible, these breaking changes. How to build an API that meets this requirement, among others, is what this post is about.

Finally, the third option would be to make zero use of FOSS. 

How can we mitigate the impact on users when releasing a new [major](https://semver.org/#summary) version of our library or service API?

## Designing APIs that are resilient to breaking changes

APIs are meant to solve user needs. 

However, we do not listen to the final users that much. Instead, we tend to expose functionalities based on our own experience, biased by our position or the knowledge we own of the platform behind. Sometimes guided by a vague research (Product-oriented) or lead with a not so clear goal in mind. At least I used to do it in that way.

### Be ready for what the user needs

Focusing on what the user really needs pulls away most of the overprint of any API: What is the user **intention** when asking for a particular action to happen?

An Intent represents a user intention of performing an action that solves a clear use case.

> Continuing with the metaphor presented in the previous paragraph, my only intention by then was to **buy groceries** **for the dinner**. In particular, I needed some avocados, tomatoes and a baguette.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continuing with the metaphor presented in the previous paragraph, my only intention by then was to **buy groceries for the dinner**. In particular, I needed some avocados, tomatoes and a baguette.
```

As you can see, the interface didn't change: I still can buy the groceries. However, the implementation changed completely.

Building APIs based on the implementation detail will nothing less than lead your users to suffer the (bad) design choices made in the past. Each change you do, will penalize completely the user experience and force to upgrade their code.

Let's pick up another example, this time a more practical one. 

Let's use our [AsyncAPI Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js). Built in Javascript, it parsers an AsyncAPI spec doc and provides a set of functions to work with the document and access the different objects and their values.

Here is a mod version of the [Streetlights tutorial](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/streetlights) document made for demo purposes:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.0.0'
info:
  title: Streetlights mod API
  version: '1.0.0-alpha'
servers:
  mosquitto:
    url: mqtt://test.mosquitto.org
    protocol: mqtt
channels:

>   light/measured:
>     publish:
>       summary: Inform about environmental lighting conditions for a particular streetlight.
>       operationId: onLightMeasured
>       message: 
>         $ref: "#/components/messages/lightMessage"
>       
>   light/measured/changed:
>     subscribe:
>       summary: Receive an update every time a lighting condition changed.
>       operationId: onLightMeasureChanged
>       message: 
>         $ref: "#/components/messages/lightMessage"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  light/measured/changed:
    subscribe:
      summary: Receive an update every time a lighting condition changed.
      operationId: onLightMeasureChanged
      message: 
        $ref: "#/components/messages/lightMessage"
...
```
Since this last channel does not provide anything to the example maybe we should hide it? 🤔

Author: Fixed!

        type: object
        properties:
          id:
            type: integer
            minimum: 0
            description: Id of the streetlight.
          lumens:
            type: integer
            minimum: 0
            description: Light intensity measured in lumens.
```

In the hypothetical case a user wants to parse this document and *get all the messages a consumer of the application can consume*, this is needed: 

```jsx
doc.channels().filter(c => c.hasSubscribe()).map(c => c.subscribe().messages()).flat();
```

We can observe that the [Parser-js](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js) API (`v1.x`) is completely coupled with the structure of the AsyncAPI spec (by the date of this post, `v2.0.0`) document. In fact, the API is just a layer on top of the Json Schema parsed document with some helpers and extras, meaning you should know how the document is structured in order to get info from it.

Let's emulate a possible breaking change. 

Imagine **messages** are now independent of channels and **Operations** get moved from where they used to be (under the channel) to the root of the document. For instance:

```yaml
asyncapi: '99.99.99'
# ...
operations:

>   onLightMeasured:
>     operationType: publish
>     summary: Inform about environmental lighting conditions for a particular streetlight.
>     message: 
>       $ref: "#/messages/lightMessage"
>     channel: 
>       $ref: "#/channels/light/measured"
>   onLightMeasureChanged:
>     operationType: subscribe
>     summary: Receive an update every time a lighting condition changed.
>     message: 
>       $ref: "#/messages/lightMessage"
>     channel:
>       $ref: "#/channels/light/measured"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  onLightMeasureChanged:
    operationType: subscribe
    summary: Receive an update every time a lighting condition changed.
    message: 
      $ref: "#/messages/lightMessage"
    channel:
      $ref: "#/channels/light/measured"
...
```
same as above

Author: Fixed!

That gave us another list of *potential* intents, most of them already covered by the list we got from the templates.

## 2. Transform potential intents to actual intents

This is one important step, if not the most. Also one of the hardest.

For this step, we tried to abstract our mind and forget most of what we knew about the structure of an AsyncAPI document. We instead focused on the models and their **logical** (from a human point of view) relationship:

- Messages flow through Channels
- Messages can exist without channels.
- Messages can be (or not) related with Operations
- Etc

We then wrote down a draft of our first list of intents.

## 3. Build a mock API

After getting a list of intents to implement, we built a simple mock API in Javascript with that list. 

Methods were returning hardcoded data, but were enough for getting an idea of how difficult would be to create such API from the point of view of a maintainer.

At this point, we faced up some API design decisions, such as: 

- Shall we add getters for all properties?

> - Are we gonna use singular and plural methods? Both? Only plural?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Are we gonna use singular or plural methods? Both?
```

Author: Fixed!

type: Engineering
tags:
  - API design
  - AsyncAPI tooling
  - Processes
cover: /img/posts/intent-driven-api/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Sergio Moya
    photo: /img/avatars/smoya.webp
    link: https://twitter.com/smoyac
    byline: Pilot at AsyncAPI Airlines
excerpt: Afraid because of breaking changes? Learn how do we plan to reduce breaking changes in our tooling APIs by introducing a new design approach called Intent-driven. 
featured: true
---

The **Free and Open-Source Software** (FOSS) model, since its inception, has brought a flurry of libraries and applications available to everyone. 

Thanks to the growth of the open-source community, we can now enjoy free software and, in most cases, generate profit from it.

I believe there is no tech company that doesn't use open source in one way or another.

FOSS has changed the way most developers operate: from coding all features from scratch to become consumers of libraries that implement most of the basic operation of an application. Sometimes even the core logic of the application is baked with free software.

So much so that I, as a developer, can't imagine having to implement a complex application from scratch. 

> If we go a step further, we won't talk only about libraries but also about APIs as services. For example, the fast adoption of the [Jamstack](https://jamstack.org) architecture, where the Backend consists on different API services (primarily third-party), are pushing SaaS companies to make public their private APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we go a step further, we won't talk only about libraries but also about APIs as services. For example, the fast adoption of the [Jamstack](https://jamstack.org) architecture, where the Backend consists of different API services (primarily third-party), are pushing SaaS companies to make their private APIs public.
```

type: Engineering
tags:
  - API design
  - AsyncAPI tooling
  - Processes
cover: /img/posts/intent-driven-api/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Sergio Moya
    photo: /img/avatars/smoya.webp
    link: https://twitter.com/smoyac
    byline: Pilot at AsyncAPI Airlines
excerpt: Afraid because of breaking changes? Learn how do we plan to reduce breaking changes in our tooling APIs by introducing a new design approach called Intent-driven. 
featured: true
---

The **Free and Open-Source Software** (FOSS) model, since its inception, has brought a flurry of libraries and applications available to everyone. 

Thanks to the growth of the open-source community, we can now enjoy free software and, in most cases, generate profit from it.

I believe there is no tech company that doesn't use open source in one way or another.

FOSS has changed the way most developers operate: from coding all features from scratch to become consumers of libraries that implement most of the basic operation of an application. Sometimes even the core logic of the application is baked with free software.

So much so that I, as a developer, can't imagine having to implement a complex application from scratch. 

> If we go a step further, we won't talk only about libraries but also about APIs as services. For example, the fast adoption of the [Jamstack](https://jamstack.org) architecture, where the Backend consists on different API services (primarily third-party), are pushing SaaS companies to make public their private APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we go a step further, we won't talk only about libraries but also about APIs as services. For example, the fast adoption of the [Jamstack](https://jamstack.org) architecture, where the backend consists of different API services (primarily third-party), is pushing SaaS companies to make their private APIs public.
```

The supermarket should provide a mechanism that lets me buy those items. How to get those, it's just the implementation detail and can be up to each supermarket to decide how to do it. 

For example, my supermarket had shelves where customers can pick up fruits from, offers bags, a balance to know the weight of those, and a checkout place. However, after the last changes, fruits are weighted at checkout, and baguettes are no longer on the shelf. So you need to ask the baker. 

As you can see, the interface didn't change: I still can buy the groceries. However, the implementation completely changed.

Building APIs based on the implementation detail will nothing less than lead your users to suffer the (not-so-good) design choices made in the past. Furthermore, each change you make will penalize the user experience and force them to upgrade their code.

Let's pick up another example, this time a more practical one. 

Let's use our [AsyncAPI Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js) built-in Javascript. 
It parses AsyncAPI spec documents and provides functions to work with them and access the different objects and their values.

> Here is a mod version of the [Streetlights tutorial](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/streetlights) document made for demo purposes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is a modified version of the [Streetlights tutorial](https://www.asyncapi.com/docs/tutorials/streetlights) document made for demo purposes:
```

it took me a couple of seconds that mod is modified, distracted me

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.0.0'
info:
  title: Streetlights mod API
  version: '1.0.0-alpha'
servers:
  mosquitto:
    url: mqtt://test.mosquitto.org
    protocol: mqtt
channels:    
  light/measured/changed:
    subscribe:
      summary: Receive an update every time a lighting condition changed.
      operationId: onLightMeasureChanged
      message: 
        $ref: "#/components/messages/lightMessage"
components:
  messages:
    lightMessage:
      payload:
        type: object
        properties:
          id:
            type: integer
            minimum: 0
            description: Id of the streetlight.
          lumens:
            type: integer
            minimum: 0
            description: Light intensity measured in lumens.
```

In the hypothetical case a user wants to parse this document and *get all the messages a consumer of the application can consume*, this is needed: 

```jsx
doc.channels().filter(c => c.hasSubscribe()).map(c => c.subscribe().messages()).flat();
```

> We can observe that the [Parser-js][parser-js] API (`v1.x`) is completely coupled with the structure of the AsyncAPI spec (by the date of this post, `v2.0.0`) document. The API is just a layer on top of the Json Schema parsed document with some helpers and extras, meaning you should know the document's structure to get info from it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can observe that the [AsyncAPI Parser][parser-js] API (`v1.x`) is completely coupled with the structure of the AsyncAPI spec (by the date of this post, `v2.0.0`) document. The API is just a layer on top of the JSON Schema parsed document with some helpers and extras, meaning you should know the document's structure to get info from it.
```

changed parser name for consistence, I clicked the link to check if you mean the same parser

Author: I think we should start not calling the JS implementation just "The parser". So I'm gonna replace rather the only mention to "AsyncAPI Parser"

Author: Please see the changes I made here: https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/241/commits/87fec2e467bbbf9604058ceb3a8d15583c3740a5

Reviewer 2: I usually write `AsyncAPI JavaScript Parser`, but more important is just to be consistent in article, so `Parser-js` is good too.

only confusing for now is `which is built-in Javascript`, what do you mean by `built-in`, ad for me it means it is build into something, while it is not the case with the Parser-js

Author: The `built-in` word is completely wrong. I replaced it by `written in`.
Thanks for the catch ❤️

> We can observe that the [Parser-js][parser-js] API (`v1.x`) is completely coupled with the structure of the AsyncAPI spec (by the date of this post, `v2.0.0`) document. The API is just a layer on top of the Json Schema parsed document with some helpers and extras, meaning you should know the document's structure to get info from it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can observe that the [Parser-js][parser-js] API (`v1.x`) is completely coupled with the structure of the AsyncAPI spec (by the date of this post, `v2.0.0`) document. The API is just a layer on top of the JSON Schema parsed document with some helpers and extras, meaning you should know the document's structure to access any information.
```

- Shall we add getters for all properties?
- Are we going to use singular or plural methods?
- Are methods going to have any argument at all?
- Etc

## 4. Validate the intents and their UX

With the new API mock built-in Javascript, we chose some of the most used [generator templates][templates] and replaced all the calls made to the old [Parser-js][parser-js] API with the new ones.

This step made us realize that some of the intents we mocked up worked like a charm: We were pretty happy seeing how the code got simplified.

However, we found some inconsistencies, such as missing intents and helpers required for simplicity purposes.

## 5. Wrap up documentation

This step included writing down all our documentation around the new API in a new repository, where developers of AsyncAPI parsers will refer and follow the specification of the API. 

Even though each parser will now maintain an individual release cycle, changes to this API will force the individual parsers to update.

It follows [Semver](https://semver.org/) (as we do for all projects), so each parser will therefore maintain its compatibility matrix, making visible what version of the API specification they support. 

> You can find the new repository holding the new Parsers API specification [here][api], which at the moment of writing this post, it's still `v1.0.0-alpha`, as we are waiting for more feedback from the community.

Reviewer 2: I would not use name `v1.0.0-alpha` as in the end there is no tag, no release really. So for now it is just `alpha`

Author: It is pending to release, but it is actually a `v1.0.0-alpha`: https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-api/blob/master/docs/v1.md#asyncapi-parser-api-v100-alpha

Reviewer 2: then why not just tagging and releasing master like this, you can do it with just a few clicks from the UI 😄

Author: done https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-api/releases/tag/v1.0.0-alpha

# What's next?

> Even though we do now have an alpha version of the new spec, work is pending around implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though we do now have an alpha version of the new parser API, work is pending around implementation.
```

[issue-1]: https://github.com/asyncapi/shape-up-process/issues/90
[issue-2]: https://github.com/asyncapi/shape-up-process/issues/84
[issue-3]: https://github.com/asyncapi/shape-up-process/issues/93
[issue-4]: https://github.com/asyncapi/shape-up-process/issues/95
[parser-js]: https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js
[templates]: https://github.com/asyncapi/generator#list-of-official-generator-templates
[api]: https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-api

# Conclusion
Intent-driven design helps to better understand your users by focusing on their intentions rather than technical details.

It is not an easy path in the short term; however, the benefits can be visible early, making the process a grateful experience.

I firmly believe making a great user experience should always be a top priority, especially for publicly available projects. If we don't care about users then, who is going to use our software?

I want to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to [Jonas Lagoni](https://github.com/jonaslagoni), who has been my partner along this journey. 
Hours of figuring out small details, long backs and forths, and discussions around user experience were easy-going, thanks to this one.

> I hope you enjoyed reading this post as much as I did writing it :)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I hope you enjoyed reading this post as much as I did writing it 😃 
```

we support emojis
